welcome to our tutorial on digital
electronics and in this tutorial I'm
going to discuss about the master/slave
flip-flops
okay so before the advent of the you
know the edge triggered flip-flops the
master-slave flip-flop was widely used
in order to protect the output from
sudden changes in the input all right so
this problem has plagued the flip-flop
community for a very long time and
probably the master slave configuration
I mean behind the development of the
master slave configuration the basic
idea was that you can keep the outputs
stable by introducing a known time delay
denoted by Td equal to that of one
clock pulse okay so if you would in turn
or anyone constructing a flip-flop
circuit would you know incorporate a
delay time off about one clock pulse
then in that case the flip-flop
configuration would be stable to certain
changes in the input okay that required
time to stabilize so if these are the
two SR flip-flop diagrams that I am
showing you over here okay so this is
the Q and the Q bar alright and here's the
clock okay and on the other hand over
here we have the q 1 and the q 1 bar
okay so this is the s 1 and s sorry R 1
inputs and from the clock of this
flip-flop we connect a not gate and take
it to the clock over here for the next
flip-flop so this is clock 2 and clock 1
in this case so this is flip-flop 1 and
this is flip-flop 2 so basically what we
see here is we can just see two SR
flip-flops being connected this way so
you'll probably might be wondering what
am i doing
rather what is the meaning of all this
okay so this thing that y'all are seeing
right here okay the way that I have
connected these two SR flip-flops right
over here gives us the master slave
configuration okay so this as you can
see here is the master slave
configuration of the flip-flops
okay so therefore all master slave
flip-flops have been you know obtained
from the master slave SR flip-flop or
rather derived from the master slave SR
flip-flop that was first formed in
somewhat this way okay so how is this
master slave flip-flop superior okay all
right I'll come to it with the help of
an example let's say I give you the
truth table over here okay there you go
Q 1 and Q1 bar okay so let's say that
the presence of the clock input we have
s equal to 0 and R equal to 1 so let's
say over here we have a 0 and a 1 and
the presence of the clock input so let's
say this clock is on for about a period
of one second so now this input would
cause you know an output over here at
the flip-flop 1 as 0 and 1 which is the
same sort of to that we would have
obtained for an SR flip-flop okay so now
till the moment that there is the clock
input I mean the clock input at the
flip-flop one is at the logic one level
the inputs are subjected to change which
would affect the output as well so here
if this flip-flop is connected in a
circuit which you know suffers from the
problem or rather in case of certain
switching applications where these
switch you know these switch signals I
mean the signals coming from the
switches you know sometimes you know
subject to sudden changes ok sudden
unprecedented and you know changes over
here due to certain fluctuations or
certain faults so then this input over
here during this
time when the clock is at logic one
level would experience the changes and
the outputs over here would change
accordingly so in cases where the inputs
you know take some time to stabilize
okay the output also keeps on varying
for that period of time till the moment
the inputs remain you know fluctuating
okay so during the period when the clock
signal is at the logic one level the
output is subject to change under the
change of the input signal okay so in
this configuration what happens is that
this configuration was basically
designed to avoid the state or rather
avoid the condition of logic race okay
so when the input you know just is
subject to you know rapid changes and
the output is not I mean output is also
changing accordingly that condition is
termed as the logic race condition okay
so during this condition what happens is
that if we just take these outputs as
the ultimate ones then it will just be
changing within the clock period so now
as soon as the clock ends the clock one
becomes inactive okay I mean the
flip-flop one output is not subject to
change anymore with changes occurring at
its input terminal so now these outputs
from flip-flop 1 travel into the input
of the flip-flop 2 where the act has
input signals okay and now here by
connecting a not gate whenever the clock
at flip-flop one falls from the logic
one to the logic zero level it just goes
to the not gate and appears at the clock
two of flip-flop two as a logic 1 signal
thereby activating its clock okay I mean
the activating the clock of flip flop 2 so
during this case the inputs to this
flip-flopping zero and one at is 1 and R
1 respectively the outputs change to 0
and 1 respectively so what we have here
is that during
second phase when the clock signal at
flip-flop one comes to logic zero level
flip-flop two gets activated and over
there since flip-flop one stores the
final state of its output the inputs to
flip-flop 2 is not subject to any kind
of variation it remains constant and
hence the output finally remains
constant so this is basically the
benefit of the master slave
configuration where we can you know
maintain the output state you know
stable with respect even I mean even
there are certain changes
I mean unprecedented and sudden changes
in the input terminals okay so having
said that if you just move on to the
truth table again so we'll see that by
applying certain input combinations over
here we obtain the results at the output
okay
similar to that as we would see before a
you know SR flip-flop so here by in this
state there is no change okay so there's
no change right here alright and by
putting logic one signals on both the s
and r inputs here in the Q and Q Bar I
mean they would just suffer the invalid
state okay so they'll enter the invalid
state over here so there you go
so this is the invalid state finally
so this is basically the circuit diagram
of the logic I mean master slave SR
flip-flop so where this flip-flop one
part is the master okay and flip flop 2
acts as the slave the slave follows the
master as the slave you know as you can
see here outputs the same thing or
rather takes an input the same thing as
is outputted by the master and you know
outputs the same as what the master had
when the clock signal just ended okay so
the basic benefit is that into the
output remains stable and subject to no
sudden changes in the input okay so if I
were just you know try and show you the
logic
of the SR flip-flop I mean SR
master-slave flip-flop then it would
look somewhat like this as you can see
here
okay this is a Q Q bar alright so this
sign that's given over here this one
represents the master slave flip-flops
okay and if we just you know modify the
master slave SR flip-flop okay let me
just write it down so this is the master
slave SR flip-flop okay so if I just you
know modify this diagram into something
like this okay so there's Q and Q Bar
okay it's a master slave configuration
alright S and R here is the clock but if we
just connect a not gate from the
S input to the R input then it becomes
a master slave D flip-flop so this is
basically the master slave D flip-flop
okay whose logic diagram can be finally
given as something like this okay
here is Q Q bar okay and the here is
a D input terminal with the clock all
right so this is basically I mean this
modification over here is basically the
same as you know connecting or rather
I'd use a different color in this case
just by connecting a not gate right over
here from the s input to r input
over here as you can see okay so there
you go so this is how we would obtain or
rather I mean this thing I think is not
visible much so yeah that's the
modification I was talking about so
having said that if we just you know
quickly move on to the truth table of
the D flip-flop it would look something
like this so here it is the D input the
clock input and the Q and Q Bar inputs
okay so when we have a zero at D input
under the presence of the clock signal Q
is set to 0 Q Bar set to 1
and at you know logic one input at D
input terminal under the presence of the
clock we have a logic one signal at Q
and 0  at Q bar respectively
okay so having said that I would just
finally come on to the most popularly
used master slave flip-flop
that's it master slave JK flip-flop okay
so here we go the master slave J K
flip-flop okay so here would be the
circuit diagram of the master slave JK
flip-flop I think you're probably you
know curious to see this okay so there
we go so here are the feedback ports okay
or this flip-flop and there's two more
NAND gates as you can see okay so they
just go into the input or rather connect
to the output of two more NAND gates
right over here and they also go and
connect to the inputs of two more NAND
gates
right over here okay and here we have a
clock input of the second flip-flop so
this is flip flop 2 okay and here or
rather I would not call it flip flop 2
because that would be you know highly
inaccurate okay and here we would have
another as you see feedback path to
these terminals and over here we would
have the preset and the clear terminals
rather clear inputs okay
and then finally from these two
terminals we would have special input
terminals okay  I mean carrying
the Q and Q Bar stages okay coming into
and falling into the first gate which
receives the inputs that is here we have
the input J and K
and now over here this is the common
terminal connecting these two gates okay
where we apply the clock all right so
this is basically the circuit of a JK
flip-flop in the master slave
configuration
this is basically the master/slave JK
flip-flop okay master set configuration
where you can see in this circuit that
we have two more inputs as you can see
the preset and the clear it's given
because whenever a flip-flop is applied
power to okay there is no guarantee as
to what state it would you know result
in at the outputs okay
it means stay in any state possible so
in order to set the flip-flop to the
logic one state are yeah but we not have
said the output of the flip-flop the
logic one state we use the preset input
okay we apply the logic zeroes your
signal over here in order to set the
flip-flop output state at logic one and
if we are going to give okay it clear
over here okay
this is also a active low say input
signal so if you're going to apply a
logic 0 signal at clear then we're going
to set the flip-flop output to logic 0
okay that's our description as to which
state we want to set the flip-flop 2 ok
so having said that I would just give
you the JK flip-flops you know the truth
table ok so here you go
so whenever we have the clock ok so J is
1 K is 0 we have this sort of results
right over here as you can see under the
presence of the clock in all the
conditions ok and finally when we have
both ones on it
this thing just toggles okay so as you
can see it will change again so there it
is the toggle state so basically we
come almost to the end of our tutorial
where I just want to show you the logic
diagram of the JK master slave flip-flop
ok denote it somewhat in this fashion
alright that's the JK flip-flop with the
clock so this is basically the logic
diagram of the master slave JK flip-flop
ok and with that we come to the end of
our discussion in this tutorial on the
master slave flip-flop country
relations and the various types of
master slave  flip-flops as you can see so
kindly check out our next tutorial on
digital electronics and till then it's
just goodbye for now and thank you